Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2025. 2. Outlook for key minerals. Outlook for lithium. Recent market developments: remarkable supply growth as mines ramp up in new regions, but refining remains concentrated.

Recent market developments: Strong demand growth outweighed by even faster supply growth. Lithium demand saw strong growth in 2024, but supply even more so. After a period of significant volatility, lithium prices have now stabilised. Lithium demand expanded by 30% year-on-year, reaching over 200 kt lithium content (Li), or about 1.1 Mt in lithium carbonate equivalent (LCE). This increase is the equivalent of global lithium demand in 2018. The bulk of lithium demand growth came from the EV sector, but energy storage, currently 9% of lithium demand, is showing rapid growth. China represents over three-quarters of global lithium demand, followed by Korea and Japan, notably due to their strong battery cathode manufacturing capacities. The rise of LFP chemistries in EV batteries drove most of the additional demand towards lithium carbonate, while lithium hydroxide, used primarily in nickel-rich cathodes, experienced smaller growth.

Global lithium production increased by over 35% in 2024, further tilting the market towards oversupply. This pushed lithium prices down to USD 12 000 per tonne of LCE, well below the peaks reached in 2022. Compared with 2022, the cost of lithium in a typical 57 kWh average-size battery fell from USD 67 to USD 15 today, significantly easing manufacturers' material bill. Lower price levels also triggered the industry's consolidation efforts, with several large-scale mergers and acquisitions taking place. For example, Rio Tinto acquired Arcadium Lithium, which had itself merged from two major lithium players - Livent and Allkem.

While much of the additional supply in 2024 came from leading producers such as China and Australia, approximately 30% of new output originated from Africa, particularly Zimbabwe and Namibia. This is a significant shift, given that Africa accounted for just 6% of global lithium mining in 2023. In Latin America, Argentina and Brazil saw a 65% surge in lithium output. Eramet's Centenario project in Argentina began small-scale production, raising hopes for an industrial breakthrough in direct lithium extraction (DLE) and unlocking new brine resources. However, the low-price environment also led to closures of several Australian operations and the cancellation of projects in diversified regions.

On the refining side, China remains the dominant supplier, producing 70% of global lithium chemicals. In December 2024, China announced it was considering adding lithium refining technology to its "dual use" export control list although some refining capacity has recently been built outside China, notably in Australia with its Kwinana and Kemerton plants. Several refineries and converters in diversified areas ramped up production in 2024, albeit with small volumes in the United States (Bessemer City), Korea (Gwangyang), Japan (Naraha), Indonesia (Sulawesi) and Germany (Bitterfeld), as well as the Kokkola project in Finland under construction.

Demand: EV and storage batteries dominate lithium consumption; consumer geography diversifies. Supply: New lithium extraction activities emerge in a number of regions; China continues to dominate refining of hard rock ore. Notes: Raw materials cover extraction of lithium from hard rock ore, as well as from clays and brines. Lithium chemicals cover the first production of lithium carbonate, hydroxide, sulphates and chlorides, and excludes reprocessing.

Market balances: The lithium market is expected to remain well-supplied in the near term, but additional mining projects will be needed to meet continued demand growth in the years ahead. Notes: Based on raw material output covering extraction of lithium from hard rock ore, clays and brines. Primary supply requirements are calculated as "total demand net of secondary supply", also accounting for losses during refining operations. See the Overview section for definitions of the base and high production cases.

Market outlook. Demand. While lithium was traditionally used in applications such as ceramics, lubricants and pharmaceuticals, the rapid expansion of the battery market for EVs and energy storage has made battery applications the overwhelmingly dominant use of lithium across all scenarios. Lithium's unique properties make it an essential material for battery cathodes and electrolytes. If prices remain stable and industrial-scale production continues to expand, short-term incentives for substituting lithium might be weakened, reinforcing lithium's role in the EV sector.

In the STEPS, annual lithium demand reaches 700 kt Li by 2035 (3 700 in LCE), up from around 205 kt Li today and just 60 kt Li in 2020. Lithium demand has already tripled since 2020, and is expected to see another tripling over the next decade. The EV sector accounts for 90% of this additional demand. Furthermore, as global investment in battery storage triples by 2030, energy storage begins to drive significant growth in lithium demand. The electrification of the energy system accounts for 95% of additional lithium demand between today and 2035. In the STEPS, lithium demand is projected to reach 1 160 kt Li by 2050 (over 6 000 kt LCE). The APS sees a 30% higher demand in 2050, with an additional 20% increase in the NZE Scenario.

Lithium consumption is currently dominated by China, around three-quarters, followed by Japan and Korea, which also host significant cathode manufacturing capacities. These regions drive a significant share of future demand growth in the near future. From 2030 onwards, consumption expands to new regions, in the United States and in the European Union, but also in other Asian nations, including Indonesia and India, as they nurture the battery manufacturing supply chains.

Mining. On the mining front, the current project pipeline appears on track to double production by 2030. This expansion is underpinned by an increase in the median size of mine output from 1 900 tonnes Li to approximately 2 700 tonnes Li. However, sustaining demand growth post-2030 would require the addition of further projects. Announced mining projects indicate some degree of geographical diversification on the horizon. The top three mining producers represented 77% of global supply in 2024, but this share falls to 67% by 2030. Additional supplies come from Africa, notably Zimbabwe and Mali. Production in North America quadruples by 2030, with Moblan and Whabouchi mine projects in Canada and Thacker Pass in the United States. In Central and South America, while supply is currently dominated by Chile, 70% of additional supplies is expected to come from Argentina.

However, the largest new projects and extensions are often driven by the incumbent producers: from Mount Holland, Kathleen Valley and Greenbushes mines in Australia, and Huaqiao and Da Hongliutan mines in China. Australian projects may act as swing producers, with their spodumene output ramped up quickly during price surges. While some projects are now under care and maintenance due to falling prices, production could be revived if downstream demand resurfaces. Accounting for project ownership offers a slightly different perspective on geographic diversification, considering that many African projects are being operated by Chinese companies, including the large-scale Goulamina project in Mali.

Refining and chemical supply outlook. For lithium chemicals, there are a large number of projects in the pipeline to process projected mine production. However, lithium refining is subject to a stronger geographic concentration, with three-quarters of additional supplies between 2024 and 2035 coming from just three countries. Lithium-rich brines, which account for about a third of global supply, are typically processed into usable chemicals near their extraction sites, primarily in China, Chile and Argentina, meaning that the distribution of these chemical supplies is largely dictated by geography. In contrast, the remaining two-thirds of lithium chemical production comes from hard rock ores, which are mined and then exported overseas for processing.

While China extracts only 22% of the world's lithium resources, it refines 70% of global lithium chemicals and controls 95% of the refining for hard rock ores. essential for nickel-rich batteries. China remains the largest source of growth for both carbonate and hydroxide production between 2024 and 2035. Lithium carbonate is also seeing production expansions in Central and South America, while expansions for hydroxide are increasingly driven by new refining projects in Japan, Korea, Europe, and North America. This divergence reflects current preferences for battery chemistries, and leaves tasks to deal with market uncertainties. If LFP gains traction beyond China, hydroxide investments may struggle. Conversely, a sustained preference for nickel-rich chemistries could leave carbonate producers at a disadvantage. Whether today's refinery plans align with tomorrow's markets remains an open question.

Market balances. In the STEPS, assuming all base case projects proceed as planned, supply is expected to stay above primary demand until the late 2020s, after which market balances shift. An estimated 55 additional average-sized mines would be required to meet demand in 2035. In the APS, market balances remain surplus for a few years, but project development would need to accelerate more rapidly to keep pace with growing demand, with even greater needs in the NZE Scenario. The lithium market is splitting into two distinct supply chains: lithium carbonate, favoured for LFP batteries, and lithium hydroxide,.

Prospects for diversified supplies: Planned refinery projects in the base case could bring up the share of ex-China producers from 30% to 40% by 2035. Notes: Select projects are those providing the largest supply additions to the market between today and 2035, excluding projects located or whose main owner is a company headquartered in the top producer.

Prospects for diversified supplies: Key projects. In the base case, the top supplier's share of lithium chemical supply declines from 70% to 60% by 2035, with the potential for further reductions if additional projects in diversified regions materialise. Lithium brines contribute to this shift, driven by expansions in Chile and new projects in Argentina. However, significant challenges persist in diversifying the refining of hard rock ores. Addressing the bottleneck in hard rock ore refining is crucial for enhancing supply resilience.

While lithium hard rock mining is expanding across multiple nations, 95% of mine concentrate processing still takes place in a single country, China. A handful of key planned projects could shift this dynamic, potentially enabling a tenfold increase in hard rock refining capacity from today's small levels. This includes expansions at Australia's Kemerton plant and the development of the Kwinana facility. In North America, domestic refining capacity is set to grow with projects such as Tesla's Texas refinery, Piedmont's North Carolina plant and Albemarle's Chester facility. Beyond these, Posco's Gwangyang plant is a notable development in Asia. In Europe, hard rock refining projects remain limited, but the recently opened Kokkola plant in Finland marks a step towards diversification.

Non-conventional deposits: Sedimentary clay. Additional supplies could be unlocked through several refinery projects utilising lithium sedimentary clay deposits. These include the Thacker Pass project in the United States, Jadar in Serbia, and Sonora in Mexico. However, refining these less conventional geological deposits carries industrial risks that need to be managed.

Additional projects in Europe?. Beyond the most probable German and Finnish lithium projects, an additional set of strategic projects identified by the European Commission could further expand the European lithium pipeline. These include three integrated projects encompassing both mining and refining: two in France (one targeting hard rock, the other brine), and one in the Czech Republic, as well as mining and refining developments in Spain and Portugal. However, the direct consumer pool, particularly European lithium battery chemical producer projects, precursor cathode material (pCAM) and cathode material, may still be insufficient to absorb much of the production from these potential projects.